Jan Newsletter - post/send Jan 24 (#86)
Openscapes/website-new: blog/2024-01-24-news-jan-2024/index.qmd

---
title: "Openscapes Newsletter #8: Winter 2024"
author:
  - name: Julie Lowndes
    orcid: 0000-0003-1682-3872
  - name: Stefanie Butland
    orcid: 0000-0002-5427-8951  
date: 2024-01-24
citation: 
  url: https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-24-news-jan-2024/
categories: [blog, newsletter]
image: ElliotLowndes-ValleyOaks-DSCF5841.jpg
---

*Welcome to Openscapes’ eighth newsletter! If you’re interested in seeing these infrequent updates in your inbox, please [sign up here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdgVXRp3V-w94GPWkR31RUfyBl37EphdQSlCOcnyeNlf8OLWw/viewform) (linked from our get involved page). And! If you have signed up but did not see this in your inbox, please check your spam folder!*

Happy New Year! 2023 saw lots of good momentum for kinder, open science and we are excited for much more change-making to come this year. In 2024 we will be braver in emphasizing the connections between open science and climate solutions, between personal growth and institutional change, and how practicing kinder science together can change the culture of science. Small things, daily, over time, compound to have big impacts.

> We're kicking off 2024 with the second annual [**Pathways to Open Science**](https://openscapes.github.io/pathways-to-open-science/) program that starts this week! This is an ongoing collaboration with [Black in Marine Science (BIMS)](https://www.blackinmarinescience.org/), [Black Women in Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Science (BWEEMS)](https://www.bweems.org/), and HBCU marine science professors led by Ileana Fenwick, with Alex Davis, PhD and Aneese Williams. Thanks to new funding from the [Mozilla Foundation's Alumni Connection grants](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/blog/mozilla-announces-first-ever-alumni-connection-grant-finalists/), we're excited to collaborate with [PREreview](https://prereview.org/) and Antoinette Foster, PhD to bring expertise in values-guided career navigation and anti-racist scholarly review to the programming this year. [Register here](https://zoom.us/meeting/register/tJ0ldempqDIrHtQ4KqAbr442Tm0xl4-h_dtC) if you're a Black marine or environmental scientist and/or an HBCU student. If you are an ally, please help us amplify Black voices; we suggest allies do not sign up for this particular series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're kicking off 2024 with the second annual [**Pathways to Open Science**](https://openscapes.github.io/pathways-to-open-science/) program that starts this week! This is an ongoing collaboration with Black in Marine Science ([BIMS](https://www.blackinmarinescience.org/)), Black Women in Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Science ([BWEEMS](https://www.bweems.org/)), and HBCU marine science professors led by Ileana Fenwick, with Alex Davis, PhD and Aneese Williams. Thanks to new funding from the [Mozilla Foundation's Alumni Connection grants](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/blog/mozilla-announces-first-ever-alumni-connection-grant-finalists/), we're excited to collaborate with [PREreview](https://prereview.org/) and Antoinette Foster, PhD to bring expertise in values-guided career navigation and anti-racist scholarly review to the programming this year. [Register here](https://zoom.us/meeting/register/tJ0ldempqDIrHtQ4KqAbr442Tm0xl4-h_dtC) if you're a Black marine or environmental scientist and/or an HBCU student. If you are an ally, please help us amplify Black voices; we suggest allies do not sign up for this particular series.
```

We're kicking off 2024 with the second annual [Pathways to Open Science](https://openscapes.github.io/pathways-to-open-science/) program that starts this week! This is an ongoing collaboration with [Black in Marine Science (BIMS)](https://www.blackinmarinescience.org/), [Black Women in Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Science (BWEEMS)](https://www.bweems.org/), and HBCU marine science professors led by Ileana Fenwick, with Alex Davis, PhD and Aneese Williams. Thanks to new funding from the [Mozilla Foundation's Alumni Connection grants](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/blog/mozilla-announces-first-ever-alumni-connection-grant-finalists/), we're excited to collaborate with [PREreview](https://prereview.org/) and Antoinette Foster, PhD to bring expertise in values-guided career navigation and anti-racist scholarly review to the programming this year. [Register here](https://zoom.us/meeting/register/tJ0ldempqDIrHtQ4KqAbr442Tm0xl4-h_dtC) if you're a Black marine or environmental scientist and/or an HBCU student. If you are an ally, please help us amplify Black voices; we suggest allies do not sign up for this particular series.

> We also have a [February Community Call] (TODO LINK): **GitHub for NASA Openscapes community project management & calendaring - a work in progress**. We invite you to come see how the NASA Openscapes Mentors are co-organizing an open calendar and shared tasks — bring your questions and your experience!

Author: TODO Link!

We'll be sharing more events and goals for 2024 in the coming months.

## Some 2023 Highlights

> We are continually iterating and documenting what works as we learn from experiences collaborating and teaching. This year we've focused on communicating this in a few talks, particularly [the Flywheel as an open source tool](https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-18-agu-talk-2023/) as we described in a talk at the AGU meeting and in [documenting things, particularly onboarding](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-09-27-documenting-things-posit-conf/) at the Posit conference in September.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are continually iterating and documenting what works as we learn from our experiences collaborating and teaching. This year we've focused on communicating this in a few talks, emphasizing [the Flywheel as an open source tool](https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-18-agu-talk-2023/) as we described in a talk at the AGU fall meeting and [documenting things openly for future us](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-09-27-documenting-things-posit-conf/), like onboarding, at the Posit conference in September.
```

> We also have a [February Community Call](https://openscapes.org/events/2024-02-20-github-calendaring/): **GitHub for NASA Openscapes community calendaring & project management - An open work in progress**. We invite you to come see how the NASA Openscapes Mentors are co-organizing an open calendar and shared tasks — bring your questions and your experience!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Join us for our [February Community Call](https://openscapes.org/events/2024-02-20-github-calendaring/): **GitHub for NASA Openscapes community calendaring & project management - An open work in progress**. We invite you to come see how the NASA Openscapes Mentors are co-organizing an open calendar and shared tasks — bring your questions and your experience!

Seeing this paper "Welcoming More Participation in Open Data Science for the Oceans" ([Fredston and Lowndes, 2024](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-marine-041723-094741)) published in the Annual Review of Marine Science made a great start to the year!
```

> [Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, Pathways to Open Science, EPA, and Fred Hutch, we learned [coaching skills that have made us better open data science mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-17-mentor-coach/), and co-wrote a preprint [ Shifting institutional culture to develop climate solutions with Open Science](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5948/) that is in review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, Pathways to Open Science, EPA, and Fred Hutch, we learned [coaching skills that have made us better open data science mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-17-mentor-coach/), and co-wrote a preprint [Shifting institutional culture to develop climate solutions with Open Science](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5948/) that is in review. NOAA Fisheries Mentors Community (https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-24-nmfs-mentors/)
```

Reviewer: add phrase about NMFS Mentors Community, link to post published same day

> [Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, Pathways to Open Science, EPA, and Fred Hutch, we learned [coaching skills that have made us better open data science mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-17-mentor-coach/), and co-wrote a preprint [ Shifting institutional culture to develop climate solutions with Open Science](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5948/) that is in review.

Author: ```suggestion
[Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, Pathways to Open Science, EPA, and Fred Hutch, we learned [coaching skills that have made us better open data science mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-17-mentor-coach/), and co-wrote a preprint [ Shifting institutional culture to develop climate solutions with Open Science](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5948/) that is in review. California Water Boards ran [their second annual Champions Cohort](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-13-waterboards/) to support their colleagues to meet open, data, and equity goals. NOAA Fisheries shared their Open Data and Open Science vision at the summer ESIP meeting! 
```

> [NASA Openscapes](https://nasa-openscapes.github.io) progress focused on learning and codeveloping with the broader open science community via hackdays focused on R, MATLAB, Cookbook, and 2i2c access policies. Mentors across 11 NASA data centers continue improving how we teach and support researchers in the Cloud via workshops, hackathons, and Champions Cohorts. California Water Boards supported [their second annual Champions cohort](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-13-waterboards/) to support their colleagues to meet open, data, and equity goals. NOAA Fisheries shared their Open Data and Open Science vision at the summer ESIP meeting! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NASA Openscapes](https://nasa-openscapes.github.io) progress focused on learning and codeveloping with the broader open science community via hackdays focused on R, MATLAB, the [Earthdata Cloud Cookbook](https://nasa-openscapes.github.io/earthdata-cloud-cookbook/), and 2i2c Openscapes JupyterHub access policies. Mentors across 11 NASA data centers continue improving how we teach and support researchers in the Cloud via workshops, hackathons, and [Champions Cohorts](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-08-01-nasa-champions/). It was truly energizing to come together in person with so many NASA Openscapes Mentors and collaborators at the summer ESIP and winter [AGU meetings](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-10-agu-fall-meeting/)!

California Water Boards ran [their second annual Champions Cohort](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-13-waterboards/) to support their colleagues to meet open, data, and equity goals. NOAA Fisheries shared their Open Data and Open Science vision at the summer ESIP meeting! 
```

Reviewer: add Carpentries Instructor training. How many certified?

and [Engaging with a Cross-NASA Subcommunity
Recap of a Carpentries Community Session with NASA and Openscapes](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-07-engaging-with-a-cross-nasa-subcommunity/)

Reviewer: need cohesion for paragraph starting "California Water Boards...". Maybe it belongs above with "[Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, ..." that refers to cohorts and mentors activities.

> We launched **two new annual programs** in 2023: The [Pathway to Open Science](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-04-26-pathways-report/) program for Black marine and environmental scientists that kicks off this week, and the [Reflections](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-09-06-reflections-2023/) program that is a lightweight commitment for individuals to identify and plan around their workflow needs. We'll share registration information ahead of May 2024!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We launched **two new annual programs** in 2023: the [Pathways to Open Science](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-04-26-pathways-report/) program for Black marine and environmental scientists, with our second offering kicking off this week, and the [Reflections](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-09-06-reflections-2023/) program that is a lightweight commitment for individuals to identify and plan around their workflow needs. We'll share registration information ahead of the next offering in May 2024!
```

[[[[- We are also planning to lead an open call for the Champions Program - with no bounds on affiliation or focus. We are looking for sponsors ]]]] do we include this?
  

> We also invested in sustainability for the community. We worked with SGCI [Focus Week]() in San Diego in May and with Nancy Maron First Five Years in Fall. This work informed our [Challenge.gov submission](LINK TO GOOGLE DOC).  we built a new [Zenodo Openscapes Community](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-31-zenodo-community/) to help find and cite Openscapes things, we [migrated our website to Quarto](TODO LINK TO BLOG), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also invested in sustainability for the community. We worked with SGCI [Focus Week] (LINK) in San Diego in May and with Nancy Maron First Five Years in Fall. This work informed our [Challenge.gov submission] (LINK TO GOOGLE DOC). We set up a new [Zenodo Openscapes Community](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-31-zenodo-community/) to help people find and cite Openscapes things and we [migrated our website from blogdown to Quarto](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-08-03-openscapes-website/). 
```

Reviewer: add phrase on what challenge.gov is

> We've been grateful to (re)connect with colleagues virtually and in person at ESIP, Carpentries, Posit, Shannon D, CSCCE Tool Tips, We moved to Mastodon and have found it challenging to reestablish the nexus of open source, environmental/Earth science, and inclusive learning that we had previously. In 2024 we will work to reconnect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've been grateful to (re)connect with colleagues virtually and in person at ESIP, AGU, The Carpentries, Posit, Shannon D, and CSCCE Tools Trials. We moved our social media to Mastodon and have found it challenging to reestablish the nexus of open source, environmental/Earth science, and inclusive learning that we had previously. In 2024 we will work to reconnect.
```

---
title: "Openscapes Newsletter #8: Winter 2024"
author:
  - name: Julie Lowndes
    orcid: 0000-0003-1682-3872
  - name: Stefanie Butland
    orcid: 0000-0002-5427-8951  
date: 2024-01-24

> draft: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We also have a [February Community Call](https://openscapes.org/events/2024-02-20-github-calendaring/): **GitHub for NASA Openscapes community calendaring & project management - An open work in progress**. We invite you to come see how the NASA Openscapes Mentors are co-organizing an open calendar and shared tasks — bring your questions and your experience!

We'll be sharing more events and goals for 2024 in the coming months.

## Some 2023 Highlights

We are continually iterating and documenting what works as we learn from our experiences collaborating and teaching. This year we've focused on communicating this in a few talks, emphasizing [the Flywheel as an open source tool](https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-18-agu-talk-2023/) as we described in a talk at the AGU fall meeting and [documenting things openly for future us](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-09-27-documenting-things-posit-conf/), like onboarding, at the Posit conference in September.

> [Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, Pathways to Open Science, EPA, and Fred Hutch, we learned [coaching skills that have made us better open data science mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-17-mentor-coach/), and co-wrote a preprint [Shifting institutional culture to develop climate solutions with Open Science](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5948/) that is in review. California Water Boards ran [their second annual Champions Cohort](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-13-waterboards/) to support their colleagues to meet open, data, and equity goals. NOAA Fisheries shared their Open Data and Open Science vision at the summer ESIP meeting! With NOAA Fisheries staff, we co-designed a [NOAA Fisheries Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-24-nmfs-mentors/) program  modeled from the [NASA Openscapes](https://nasa-openscapes.github.io/) Mentors Framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/team) were an important part of the Year of Open Science. Together, across NASA Earthdata, NOAA Fisheries, California Water Boards, Pathways to Open Science, EPA, and [Fred Hutch](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-04-fred-hutch/), we learned [coaching skills that have made us better open data science mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-17-mentor-coach/), and co-wrote a preprint [Shifting institutional culture to develop climate solutions with Open Science](https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5948/) that is in review. California Water Boards ran [their second annual Champions Cohort](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-12-13-waterboards/) to support their colleagues to meet open, data, and equity goals. NOAA Fisheries shared their Open Data and Open Science vision at the summer ESIP meeting! With NOAA Fisheries staff, we co-designed a [NOAA Fisheries Openscapes Mentors](https://openscapes.org/blog/2024-01-24-nmfs-mentors/) program  modeled from the [NASA Openscapes](https://nasa-openscapes.github.io/) Mentors Framework.
```

We launched **two new annual programs** in 2023: the [**Pathways to Open Science**](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-04-26-pathways-report/) program for Black marine and environmental scientists, with our second offering kicking off this week, and the [**Reflections**](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-09-06-reflections-2023/) program that is a lightweight commitment for individuals to identify and plan around their workflow needs. We'll share registration information ahead of the next offering in May 2024!
  
We also invested in sustainability for the community. We worked with SGCI [Focus Week]() in San Diego in May and with Nancy Maron First Five Years in Fall. This work informed our [Challenge.gov submission](LINK TO GOOGLE DOC).  we built a new [Zenodo Openscapes Community](https://openscapes.org/blog/2023-05-31-zenodo-community/) to help find and cite Openscapes things, we [migrated our website to Quarto](TODO LINK TO BLOG), 

> We've been grateful to (re)connect with colleagues virtually and in person at ESIP, AGU, The Carpentries, Posit, Shannon D, and CSCCE Tools Trials. We moved our social media to Mastodon and have found it challenging to reestablish the nexus of open source, environmental/Earth science, and inclusive learning that we had previously. In 2024 we will work to reconnect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've been grateful to (re)connect with colleagues virtually and in person at ESIP, AGU, The Carpentries, Posit, The Open Environmental Data Project, and CSCCE Tools Trials. We moved our social media to Mastodon and have found it challenging to reestablish the nexus of open source, environmental/Earth science, and inclusive learning that we had previously. In 2024 we will work to reconnect.
```
